hi everybody Welcome To Live blogger in
this tutorial series we are building
this budget tracker application using
HTML CSS and JavaScript now in the
previous video we created the UI of our
application and this is how it looks we
have just added some dummy transactions
over here and they are just static
transactions and we have created the zui
now in this video we will start adding
the functionality of our app so here we
can see that if we add an income for
example let's try app develop ment and
let's set the income to $2,000 and let's
click on ADD transaction and here we can
see that the balance is updated and we
also have the updated transaction
displayed over here in the transactions
list so in this video we will start
adding this functionality using
JavaScript so let's get
[Applause]
[Music]
started this is our source code and uh
here if you go to the end here we can
see that we have linked our main.js file
in the index HTML file so let's go to
the main.js file and let's start adding
our functionality so the first thing we
will do is we will remove these uh dummy
transactions from
here and let's remove all of this I'll
just keep one for
reference and if you go back here we can
see that we have this one
transaction and uh let's go ahead and
use a class-based approach this time to
write our code so what we're going to do
is we're going to create a class called
budget tracker and we're going to
instantiate the class so let's go and
try doing that I'll just create a class
called budget
tracker and uh this is our budget
tracker class and in this we need to
have different methods and properties so
first of all let's create a Constructor
now a Constructor is basically a method
that runs whenever the class is
instantiated so whenever we go ahead and
create a new budget tracker so if just
have budget tracker equals new budget
tracker then the Constructor will run
automatically so let's go ahead and
create a Constructor so we can just have
Constructor and here we can add the code
so this code will be basically used to
initialize our project so let's go ahead
and create a property called
transactions so we need to type this do
transactions and we need to set it to a
function that will load our transactions
so let's typ this do load
transactions now let me explain to you
what this is so this is basically a
keyword in JavaScript to reference the
object so if you create this budget
tracker object over here and if you
instantiate the object then this will
reference to the transaction of this
current object that we just instantiated
and if you create one more object so if
you just have budget Tracker 2 equals
new budget tracker and now if you go
ahead and use uh these transactions
inside the second one then the
transactions of the second object
will be used so in this way we can make
sure that the transactions property of
the current object is being used so
that's why we need to use this uh this
keyword and we're going to create this
method called load transactions for this
right now the next thing we will do is
we'll also reference the HTML elements
in the Constructor so let's tab this
form equals and we need to reference the
form so here if you go to our HTML here
we have this form with an ID of
transaction form so let's go back and
type equals document do get element by
ID and here let's Ty transaction
form and then we also need to reference
uh the transaction list so here we have
this uh division with an idea of
transaction list so let's reference that
as well I just have this do transaction
list equals document. getet element by
ID and list of transaction
list and then lastly we need to
reference the balance element so here we
have this uh div with an ID of balance
so let's reference that as well so let
have this dot balance element equals
document. getet element by
ID and let's St balance over here and
then we also need to run some methods in
this Constructor so we'll create a
method called init event
listeners and uh this will create the
event listeners for our project so
basically we're going to add event
listener to the form so when we submit
the form we need to do something with
the data and then let's call a method
called render transactions and we'll
create the method in a minute so list a
render
transactions and then we'll also call a
method called update
balance so this is basically our
Constructor so in the Constructor we are
basically loading all the transactions
and adding it to this transactions
property and then we are referencing the
form transaction list and balance
elements from the HD
and then we are calling these methods so
now let's go and create these methods
we'll just create empty methods for now
for some of these so let's type load
transactions and uh in this we'll just
return an empty array and then let's
create another method which is init
event listeners and we'll just leave it
blank we'll write the code later and
then we have this method called render
transactions and then we need to create
a method called delete transaction
and we'll also get an ID in
that and then we need to create a method
called update
balance right now let's goad and start
writing the code for this what we will
do is uh we'll create a transactions for
now and we'll just create a static array
for now and later we will store all the
data inside the local storage but for
now we'll just create a const and uh
we'll just name it
transactions and let's create an array
now in this we'll have objects so in the
objects we'll have ID and for the ID
I'll just type date. now which will get
the current date and it will have a
unique number and let's type description
and let's set it to monthly salary these
are just for testing and let's type
amount and let's set the amount to
3,500 and then we have type and let's
set the type to
income and let's create one more
object and let's typ ID and let's set it
to date. now so date. now returns the
number of milliseconds that has elapsed
since January 1 1970 so this will give
us a unique ID and let's tap description
and uh let's set the description to
freelance
writing and let's set the amount to
minus 500 so this will be an expense so
let's Ty type
expense so now that we have created this
dummy transactions let's go ahead and
return that so just have
transactions and now if you go ahead and
console.log transactions let's see
whether it is being
displayed so let's right click over here
and go to
inspect and here we can see we have the
array and in that we have these two
transactions so it is working so the
transactions are basically loaded inside
this transactions property inside our
object right now let's go and create
this uh render transactions method so we
already have this uh element referenced
which is called transaction list so
let's use that over here I just type
this dot transaction
list do in our HTML and let's set it
equal to blank so now we can see that we
don't have any transactions displayed
and for now we need to display the
transactions from this transactions
array so the transactions array is
stored inside this transactions property
over here inside our object so let's
Loop through all the transactions inside
this so for that we can just type this
do transactions and the first thing we
will do is we will use the slice method
so the slice method is used to create a
copy of your array so what we will do is
we'll just create a copy of the array so
that the original is untouched and then
we'll also sort the array so that the
last element that was updated is
displayed at the top so let's add a sort
and here for the sort we will use the
compare function so let's tap a B these
are the two values and here we need to
Ty b. ID minus a. ID so what this will
do is basically it will compare these uh
two IDs and the larger ID will be stored
before the smaller ID so whenever create
a new transaction value then the date is
stored so once we store the transaction
for the first element the current uh
number of milliseconds that elapsed
after January 1 1970 is stored over here
and and when we create one more
transaction we have the value stored
over here but uh it'll be a later value
because uh it is stored after the second
one so in this way we will have
different IDs and uh the latest
transaction will have a greater ID so in
this way we will sort the array in which
the greater transaction ID will be shown
first right after sorting this let's go
ahead and add a four each and in the
four each we will Loop through each of
the transactions so let's stop
transaction this will be the name of the
individual transactions so let's create
an error function over here and you can
name this anything you want I have just
named a transaction and here the first
thing we will do is we'll create uh
division so let's St const transaction
division equals document. create element
and let's create a div now if you go
back to our HTML file here we can see
that we also have this class added to
the div so we have a class called
transaction so let's up transaction div
do classlist dot add and let's add
transaction and we also need to add one
more class and the other class is
basically the type of transaction so
here we can see that we have income and
this class can be income or
expense so for that we can just get the
transaction type so we have the type
over here so since we are looping
through this array we can just access it
so let's Ty transaction do type so this
will add the transaction class and also
the type class which is income or
expense to the div right now let's goad
and edit the HTML of the transaction div
so let's start transaction div do inner
HTML equals and let's use back text now
here we need to copy the HTML structure
so let's copy this HTML code inside the
transaction div and let's paste it over
here now you need to change this span
content to the description of the
transaction so let's tab dollar symbol
crais trans action do description
because we have the description over
here and then we need to add the amount
over here so K let's type dollar symbol
color braces transaction do amount and
then we have the delete button and for
the amount we'll also use math. apps
function so that even if we have a lot
of decimal places we just need to
display two of them so here let's tap
math.abs which is absolute value and
let's add all this inside the method and
here let's tab do two
fixed and let's set the value to two and
then for the delete button we also need
to pass the ID of the transaction so
that we can delete the correct
transaction so here we will add one more
attribute called Data hyphen ID and we
will set it equal to the transaction ID
so let's tab dollar symbol craes
transaction do ID and then we have this
delete button and and uh now let's go
outside this uh inner HTML block and uh
let's go ahead and add the transaction
div to the transaction list so here we
have already referenced the transaction
list so let's go ah and tap this do
transaction
list do append child and let's add the
transaction div over here and now if we
go ahead and save this now we can see
that we have the two transactions
displayed over here so we have monthly
salary and freelance writing so they are
displayed over here
if we change this to for example 1,500
they are reflected over
here so the transactions are being
displayed correctly and we also have the
correct color being displayed because we
are adding the class income and expense
to these transactions now let's go ahead
and add the functionality of deleting
the transaction so let's go back and uh
here after this for each Loop let's go
ahead and type this do attach delete
event
listeners so we'll create this method
called attach delete event listeners and
in that we will add event listeners to
all the delete buttons so let's create
the function so let's tap attach delete
event listeners and here first of all
let's select all the delete buttons so
let's tap this do transaction list do
query selector all and here let's type
dot delete button because uh we have
this class of delete button for all the
delete buttons and let's also add a four
each over here and and let's select each
of these buttons and let's call it
button and here let's type button. add
event listener and let's listen for the
click event and uh when the button is
clicked we just call the method called
delete transaction and we need to pass
the ID so the ID is basically inside the
button so we have this data attribute
now to access the data attribute you
have to tap button which is this button
right here dot data set dot the name and
we need to convert this into a number so
let's type number over
here and let's add all of this inside it
right now let's go ahead and add the
functionality of delete so here in the
delete transaction method let's St this
do transactions equals this.
transactions do filter so this filter
method basically returns an array that
meets some specific condition that we
added so here in the condition let's
type transaction
transaction. ID is not equal to ID so
now what this will do is it will remove
all the transactions that has this ID of
the ID that we specified over here so it
will basically remove the current
transaction and now let's call this
function called render transactions and
we'll also update the balance so list up
this do render transactions List have
this do update balance and now if you go
back and if I click on delete and both
the transactions are being deleted so
let's see what's the problem let's check
whether we have the correct ID so let's
right click over here and go to inspect
let's go to the delete
button and for the delete button we have
this ID of
2953 at the end and uh let's check the
ID of the second one and here also we
have the same ID that's because we are
creating both these transactions at the
same time now the ID will not be same if
we add the transaction through here so
let's go ahead and add some transaction
ID over here so I'll just Ty one and
two right now let's go back and reload
and now let's click on this delete
button and the correct transaction is
deleted if I click on this one it is
deleted so everything is working all
right so with that we have added the
functionality of displaying the
transactions and deleting it now we'll
just stop the video over here and the
next video we will add the functionality
of getting the transactions from this
input form and we will also add the
functionality of updating the balance so
we will do all of that in the next video
so that's basically it for this video if
you have any doubts you can ask in the
comments below and if you like this
video please click on the like button
and subscribe to this channel to get the
latest video updates thanks a lot for
watching have a nice day
[Music]
a